Instructions to compile gudhi in a conda env (#607)
GUDHI/gudhi-devel: .github/how_to_compile_gudhi_in_a_conda_env.md

# Install a conda development environment to compile GUDHI

## Install miniconda

Download the [installer](https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/miniconda.html) required by your system and follow the [instructions](https://conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/user-guide/install/index.html).

## Create a dedicated environment

```bash
conda install -c conda-forge mamba  # installation with mamba is faster
conda create --name gudhi
conda activate gudhi
mamba install -c conda-forge python cmake doxygen eigen cgal-cpp
```

Some of the requirements are in the gudhi repository (please refer to
[how to use github to contribute to gudhi](how_to_use_github_to_contribute_to_gudhi.md)).

> In the gudhi repository - let's call it `/workdir/gudhi` i.e. - once submodules are initialised:

Reviewer: Maybe mention the need to clone the whole gudhi repo (I guess it's not always straightforward) - including submodules - and once they are initialized...

Author: Ok, you did the same remark than @mglisse , so I precised it on [5839625](https://github.com/GUDHI/gudhi-devel/pull/607/commits/5839625a253fbb54b40205da1a3e2811b29a1be2)

```bash
pip install -r ext/gudhi-deploy/build-requirements.txt 
pip install -r ext/gudhi-deploy/test-requirements.txt  # pytorch can be painful to install - not mandatory
```

## Compilation

In order to compile all c++ utilities, examples, benchmarks, unitary tests, and python module:
```bash
cd /workdir/gudhi
rm -rf build; mkdir build  # /!\ any existing build folder will be removed
cd build
# To build all even examples and benchmarks
cmake -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release -DCMAKE_PREFIX_PATH=$CONDA_PREFIX -DWITH_GUDHI_EXAMPLE=ON -DWITH_GUDHI_BENCHMARK=ON ..
```

### Specific python compilation

In order to compile only python module
```bash
cd /workdir/gudhi
rm -rf build; mkdir build  # /!\ any existing build folder will be removed
cd build
cmake -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release -DCMAKE_PREFIX_PATH=$CONDA_PREFIX ..
cd src/python
# To build python module in parallel

> python setup.py build_ext -j 16 --inplace  # 16 is the number of CPUthat are used to compile the python module. Can be any other value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
python setup.py build_ext -j 16 --inplace  # 16 is the number of CPU that are used to compile the python module. Can be any other value.
```

cd build
# python OFF to prevent python modules search makes cmake faster
cmake -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release -DCMAKE_PREFIX_PATH=$CONDA_PREFIX -DWITH_GUDHI_PYTHON=OFF -DUSER_VERSION_DIR=version ..
make user_version;
cd version
mkdir build
cd build
# python OFF to prevent python modules search makes cmake faster
cmake -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release -DCMAKE_PREFIX_PATH=$CONDA_PREFIX -DWITH_GUDHI_PYTHON=OFF  ..
make doxygen 2>&1 | tee dox.log
grep warning dox.log # Warnings can be lost with parallel doxygen
firefox html/index.html # [optional] To display the c++ documentation. Anything else than firefox can be used.
```

### Specific python documentation generation

```bash
cd /workdir/gudhi
rm -rf build; mkdir build  # /!\ any existing build folder will be removed
cd build
# python OFF to prevent python modules search makes cmake faster - it is the next one in user version that matters
cmake -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release -DCMAKE_PREFIX_PATH=$CONDA_PREFIX -DWITH_GUDHI_PYTHON=OFF -DUSER_VERSION_DIR=version ..
make user_version;
cd version
mkdir build
cd build
cmake -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release -DCMAKE_PREFIX_PATH=$CONDA_PREFIX ..
cd python
# To build python module in parallel

> python setup.py build_ext -j 16 --inplace  # 16 is the number of CPUthat are used to compile the python module. Can be any other value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
python setup.py build_ext -j 16 --inplace  # 16 is the number of CPU that are used to compile the python module. Can be any other value.
```

# Install a conda development environment to compile GUDHI

## Install miniconda

> Download the [installer](https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/miniconda.html) required by your system and follow the [instructions](https://conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/user-guide/install/index.html).

Reviewer 2: I used miniforge last time, it uses 100% conda-forge (anaconda isn't even configured). I am just listing it here, no need to change.

## Create a dedicated environment

```bash
conda install -c conda-forge mamba  # installation with mamba is faster
conda create --name gudhi
conda activate gudhi
mamba install -c conda-forge python cmake doxygen eigen cgal-cpp
```

Some of the requirements are in the gudhi repository (please refer to
[how to use github to contribute to gudhi](how_to_use_github_to_contribute_to_gudhi.md)).
In the gudhi repository - let's call it `/workdir/gudhi` i.e. - once submodules are initialised:

```bash

> pip install -r ext/gudhi-deploy/build-requirements.txt 

Reviewer 2: A quick reminder about the need to clone submodules may be useful.

Author: I put the link to the how_to_use_github_to_contribute_to_gudhi.md and precised `once submodules are initialised`. Do you want me to add the exact git command (`git submodule update --init`) instead of the sentence `once submodules are initialised` ? Maybe it would be clearer.

Author: Ok, you did the same remark than @Hind-M  , so I precised it on [5839625](https://github.com/GUDHI/gudhi-devel/pull/607/commits/5839625a253fbb54b40205da1a3e2811b29a1be2)

pip install -r ext/gudhi-deploy/test-requirements.txt  # pytorch can be painful to install - not mandatory
```

## Compilation

In order to compile all c++ utilities, examples, benchmarks, unitary tests, and python module:
```bash
cd /workdir/gudhi

> rm -rf build

Reviewer: Maybe add a comment here explaining that any existing 'build' folder will be removed (in case the commands are just run by the user without really paying attention to what they are doing).

mkdir build
cd build
# To build all even examples and benchmarks

> cmake -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release -DCMAKE_PREFIX_PATH=$CONDA_PREFIX -DWITH_GUDHI_EXAMPLE=ON -DWITH_GUDHI_BENCHMARK=ON ..

Reviewer 2: So weird that `-DCMAKE_PREFIX_PATH=$CONDA_PREFIX` is needed (not your fault).

Reviewer 2: https://cmake.org/cmake/help/latest/variable/CMAKE_SYSTEM_PREFIX_PATH.html says that `CMAKE_SYSTEM_PREFIX_PATH` on Unix contains
> ENV{CONDA_PREFIX} when using a conda compiler

But since `-DCMAKE_PREFIX_PATH=$CONDA_PREFIX` currently helps, whatever the reason, then it is indeed good to have it here.

Author: It was not working on my setup. Strange, because I have cmake 3.22, and this feature has been added on cmake 3.18.
As cmake minimal version is 3.5, I would prefer to keep it for the moment.

```

### Specific python compilation

In order to compile only python module
```bash
cd /workdir/gudhi

> rm -rf build

Reviewer: Same here?

Author: Done on 7941d119

mkdir build
cd build

> # To build all even examples and benchmarks

Reviewer 2: Is this comment ok for python?

Author: No, python examples are not built. Do you want me to precise ?

Reviewer 2: If the comment says something that doesn't match reality, then I think the comment needs to be changed (or removed). It was probably just a copy-paste that was right elsewhere but not in this location.

Author: Ok, I got it, sorry... Yes it was a bad copy/paste. Done on b440e2b6

cmake -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release -DCMAKE_PREFIX_PATH=$CONDA_PREFIX ..
cd src/python
# To build python module in parallel

> python setup.py build_ext -j 16 --inplace

Reviewer: Maybe we should comment that '16' can be some other smaller number if the user notices that his computer is running slow...

Author: I added a comment on 953cbffc

# to clean the build
# python setup.py clean --all
```

In order to use freshly compiled gudhi python module:
```bash
PYTHONPATH=/workdir/gudhi/build/src/python python # or ipython, jupyter, ...
```

### Specific C++ documentation generation

```bash
cd /workdir/gudhi
rm -rf build
mkdir build
cd build
# python OFF to prevent python modules search makes cmake faster
cmake -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release -DCMAKE_PREFIX_PATH=$CONDA_PREFIX -DWITH_GUDHI_PYTHON=OFF -DUSER_VERSION_DIR=version ..
make user_version;
cd version
mkdir build
cd build
# python OFF to prevent python modules search makes cmake faster
cmake -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release -DCMAKE_PREFIX_PATH=$CONDA_PREFIX -DWITH_GUDHI_PYTHON=OFF  ..
make doxygen 2>&1 | tee dox.log
grep warning dox.log # Warnings can be lost with parallel doxygen
firefox html/index.html # [optional] To display the c++ documentation. Anything else than firefox can be used.
```

### Specific python documentation generation

```bash
cd /workdir/gudhi
rm -rf build
mkdir build
cd build

> # python OFF to prevent python modules search makes cmake faster - it is the next one in user version that matters

Reviewer: I didn't get what you mean by "it is the next one in user version that matters"?

Author: The first cmake command is here just to build the _user_ version, so we can set python option to `OFF`, even if we build the python documentation. But we have to set python to `ON` (default value) on the next cmake command to build the python module as the examples in the documentation are tested.
I can remove `it is the next one in user version that matters` if it is adding some confusion.

Reviewer 2: The second call to `cmake`, a few lines below. This may become clearer after #611 .

Reviewer: Ok I see. So maybe saying something like:
```suggestion
# python OFF to prevent python modules search makes cmake faster - it is the next cmake call in user version that matters
```
